---
tags:
    - m1000
    - scout
    - build
    - active-stability-system
    - minimal-clips
    - hoverclock
    - electrifying-focus-shots
    - hipster
    - hazard-6x2
---

# Build Breakdown: Multi-Choice M1000 Classic (Scout's Primary, Modded Hazard 6x2)

| Post Info          |                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Author             | u/Virryn__                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Post Date          | 2022-07-12                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Original Post Link | [BUILD BREAKDOWN: Multi-Choice (Scout's M1000 Classic) \[MODDED: Haz6x2\]](https://www.reddit.com/r/technicaldrg/comments/vx1djk/build_breakdown_multichoice_scouts_m1000_classic/) |

This breakdown post will be a bit different from the others I've written so far. The M1000 is
debatably the most well balanced weapon in DRG, in that it has the most competitive overclock
options available to it out of any weapon in the game on modded difficulties. As such, this post
will be considering multiple overclock choices: **Active Stability System**, **Minimal Clips**,
**Hoverclock**, and **Electrifying Focus Shots**. In this post, I'll be referring to this setup as
**MCMC** (**M**ulti-**C**hoice **M**1000 **C**lassic).

For useful M1000 (both **Hipster** and normal) breakpoints, see [M1000 Classic
Breakpoints](../data/m1000-classic-breakpoints.md).

# A Breakdown of Multi-Choice M1000

Scout is, for the most part, the king of precision, and the closest thing that Deep Rock has to a
support class. While the other classes rely largely on their weapons and usually end up using their
equipment sparingly or as a last resort, Scout is unique in that his mobility is a necessary part of
his core combat loop. It is apt, then, that we look at one of the weapons that complements his
movement the most: the M1000 Classic.

All numbers in this post are taken from [karl.gg](https://karl.gg/).

!!! info "TL;DR"

    - **231XX** is high skill, high reward.
    - Tier 4 has some interesting distinctions that I'll go into more detail on below.
    - **Stun** and **fear** on Tier 5 are both very good picks.
    - **Blowthrough** paired with **IFGs** and **fear** can be incredible crowd control.

## Why MCMC?

**Hipster** is a powerful option on Hazard 5. The large ammo pool combined with decent grunt clear
capabilities and fast-acting DPS on Praets and Oppressors give the average player a lot of leeway in
terms of choosing what to spend their ammo on. Where **Hipster** struggles, however, is against the
kind of high importance targets that are at the top of the priority list in modded games; Menaces,
Mactera, Shellbacks (if you're not taking Armor Break), Wardens, etc. **Hipster** loses a lot of its
DPS at mid- to long-range because of its hipfire spam requirement.

**MCMC**, on the other hand, leans much further into focus shots, while still retaining the utility
of a quick emergency hipfire. This is the most versatile setup with the M1000, largely because of
the breakpoints it hits. Some important ones being:

- Hipfire headshot and focus shot bodyshot grunts;
- Focus shot headshot slashers (and guards if you have WP damage);
- Focus shot bodyshot acid spitters; and
- Focus shot weakpoint shot Mactera Spawn and Trijaws, to name a few.

**MCMC** consists of 4 options: **Active Stability System**, **Minimal Clips**, **Hoverclock**, and
**Electrifying Focus Shots**.

- **Active Stability System** is my personal favorite. It trades a slight bit of sustain (a slower
  reload speed) for slightly faster burst (faster focus speed) which allows you to get in and out of
  situations that much faster.
- **Minimal Clips** gives you a fair nudge in the direction of sustain, with more ammo in the mag
  and a faster reload speed, allowing you to possibly kill another dangerous target before a reload,
  while also letting you get back into the action faster with a new mag.
- **Hoverclock**, after you learn it, gives Scout even more mobility options, though compared to
  Special Powder or Dash, Hoverclock is largely a defensive tactic.
- **Electrifying Focus Shots** trades a small bit of focus damage for a DoT electric tick. While
  this DoT (especially the slow portion) can be powerful against things such as Praets or Goo
  Bombers, having to trade focus shot damage for it means that you will end up having to wait for
  the DoT to tick for certain enemies to die. The most egregious example of this is Acid Spitters;
  while they will still die as they would to another **MCMC** OC, they will be alive for a few extra
  seconds, which could allow them to get a shot off at a teammate. Personally, I see no reason to
  take this overclock over another choice, though I believe it does still hit all the important
  breakpoints.

## Tier 1

A fairly boring tier, we have **Expanded Ammo Bags** and **Increased Caliber Rounds**, which give
+40 ammo and +10 damage respectively. A newer player may benefit more from having a larger ammo
pool, but if you're playing modded you're likely not a new player.

!!! info "Verdict"

    Take option 2 **T1B Increased Caliber Rounds**.

## Tier 2

This tier has 3 options, but sadly it's the most brainless tier on the gun. **Fast-Charging Coils**
gives us +25% more focus speed, **Better Weight Balance** reduces per-shot spread by 30%, max
crosshair bloom by 20%, and recoil by 50%, and **Hardened Rounds** gives us 220% armor break
potential.

- Faster focus speed is nice to have, but is overshadowed by armor breaking by a wide margin.
- As long as you're not hipfire spamming, the M1000's spread and recoil are easily manageable.
- Armor break is incredibly helpful against not only Shellbacks and Brundles, but also Grunts, as
  their bodies are indeed armored.

!!! info "Verdict"

    Take option 3 **T2C Hardened Rounds**.

## Tier 3

A more interesting but ultimately pretty obvious tier: **Killer Focus**, a 25% focus shot damage
increase, versus **Extended Clip**, which gives us +6 bullets in the mag.

- Focus shots are the bread and butter of this setup. More focus damage helps out quite a bit
  against plenty of enemies; Spitballers, Goo Bombers, Menaces, Praets, the list goes on.
- A larger magazine lets you kill more per mag, but you have a grappling hook. You can easily
  reposition to get some breathing room and reload, without having to give up a sizable damage
  increase.

!!! info "Verdict"

    Take option 1 **T3A Killer Focus**.

## Tier 4

Here we have a hotly debated choice. **Super Blowthrough Rounds** gives the gun +3 penetrations on
both focus **and** hipfire shots, while **Hollow Point Bullets** grants us +20% weakpoint damage.

- Blowthrough, combined with T5 fear and an IFG, can be used to repel most enemies back through a
choke over and over ad infinitum. It can also have ammo efficiency and TTK benefits, as often on
modded, two Spitters or Mactera end up lining themselves up for blowthrough shots. You can also
usually group up Praetorians and get some heavy damage on them, and it's fun to blow right through a
Mactera charging up at you and kill a teammate chilling across the map.
- Weakpoint damage gives you a notable breakpoint in that you can kill a Hazard 6 Menace scaled up
to 4 players with 4 focus weakpoint shots, as opposed to blowthrough which needs an additional
hipfire shot. This is most relevant for Active Stability System and Hoverclock. WP damage also gives
you a nice bit more stopping power against Spitballers, Oppressors, Goo Bombers, Dreadnaughts,
Wardens, etc.

!!! info "Verdict"

    **Personal choice**. I prefer option 2 **T4B Hollow Point Bullets**.

## Tier 5

The most playstyle- and build-defining tier on this weapon. **Hitting Where It Hurts** gives your
focus shots a 100% chance to Stun whatever it hits. **Precision Terror** gives your focused
weakpoint kills a 100% chance to inflict Fear on enemies that can be feared, within 4 meters.
**Killing Machine** reduces your reload time by 0.75 seconds if you reload 1 second after a kill.

- Stun is an incredibly powerful status effect, and can be used both offensively and defensively. It
helps hit follow up weakpoint shots on Wardens, lets you stop a Menace from barraging you or your
team, forces a Praetorian to stop spitting, and causes Goo Bombers to pause momentarily, even if
they're spraying goo on the ground.
- Fear has two main uses: forcing ground back through a choke (or just generally away from you), and
forcing Mactera to turn away from you and your team for a bit of breathing room. If you're not
running cryo grenades and find yourself consistently mown down by Mactera, consider taking Fear.
- A faster reload sounds nice, but on a class with multiple fast repositioning options and a weapon
that already reloads pretty fast, a slightly quicker reload quickly becomes redundant. That,
combined with the fact that the same effect can be achieved with animation cancelling, means Killing
Machine really isn't worth taking.

!!! info "Verdict"

    Take options 1 **T5A Hitting Where It Hurts** or 2 **T5B Precision Terror**.

## Secondary and Grenades

**White Phosphorous** Boomstick gives you a lot of up-close burst damage, while also letting you
utilize fire spread to thin out a swarm easily and efficiently, and giving you a lot of ignite
potential for a [**Volatile Bullets**](./volatile-bullets.md) Gunner on your team. You can also take
Cryo Bolt or Fire Bolt Boltshark, which let you deal with stationary enemies and grunts well
respectively, though sadly Fire Bolts are much too slow to get much ignite value out of for the
Gunner. Embedded Detonators Zhukovs is an option, but they're really only powerful against
Praetorians and Oppressors, which are almost never the main focus of a combat engagement; you will
have enough damage against them with the M1000 itself.

Cryo grenades and IFGs are both very competitive picks. The choice largely comes down to how your
team deals with Mactera. If the Driller is skilled with **Thin Containment Field** and the Engineer
is running Inferno, you're probably fine taking IFGs, and if you really want to you can take Fear on
tier 5 to make up for them. If your team struggles with or has limited options against Mactera,
cryos are quite powerful as Mactera clouds show up often on modded difficulties, and have the added
benefit of taking out Breeders, as well as the ability to flash-freeze a teammate's body for an easy
revive. However, you lose out on the team-wide benefits of IFGs, which can be used to practically
lock down a Bulk before it reaches an objective (Doretta, a nicely-prepared Salvage objective,
etc.), or can be utilized to block off a team's flank from encroaching enemies that the other
classes haven't yet noticed.

## Playstyle and Tips

An **MCMC** user needs to be focused on keeping their team alive. You are Overwatch; you are the
early warning system for your team, looking in while picking off dangers from the outskirts of the
battle before zipping in and letting loose a few Boomstick shells at a pack of slashers and a clean
hipfire headshot on a grunt that was about to take a piece out of somebody. Play with and around
your team; mirror their movements, stick with them, try to support them if they take a wrong turn
and become vulnerable.

- Grapple often. You have no reason to be near the swarm; don't feel bad about fleeing to draw a
  flock of Mactera away from the others so you can pick them off more safely yourself.
- Without the proper setup, you have almost no swarm clearing potential. In a team scenario, you
  should never shoot at Grunts first if there are other enemies on the board. Only take them out if
  they're an immediate danger to you or someone you're watching.
- Whether you have Stun or Fear, use them both as often as necessary. Two bullets spent on a Praet's
  armor plate aren't two bullets wasted if they blocked that Praet from inflicting heavy damage to
  an unsuspecting teammate; likewise, focusing a Mactera Spawn over a Trijaw to proc Fear may save
  someone's life, even if you thought the Trijaw was the higher priority target.
- Use IFGs often. You have 6 of them, and you get 3 back per resupply. Hand them out like candy. The
  Engineer's stuck in a pit with bugs running down on him? Chuck two at him, now he has much more
  legroom and time to kite them around. A line of grunts have strolled through an unnoticed hole in
  the repellant? Fastball an IFG at them, and they're out of commission for anywhere from 5 to 15
  seconds.
- Grapple in the middle of a reload if necessary. Bullets in your gun are nice, but they're useless
  if you can't spend them because three Trijaws unloaded on you while you were slashed in the middle
  of a reload. Reposition, then strike, not vice versa.
- Flare often. Press 4 and Mouse1.
- While this is largely a focus shot build, hipfires are still fair game. Headshot Grunts, bodyshot
  Web Spitters, and waste 3 bullets missing a Swarmer that you could have just pickaxed, all without
  remorse. Just make sure you make up the misses with hard hits.


*[MCMC]: Multi-Choice M1000 Classic
*[AB]: Armor Breaking
*[WP]: Weakpoint
*[BT]: Blowthrough
*[DPS]: Damage Per Second
*[DoT]: Damage Over Time
*[OC]: Overclock
*[TTK]: Time-to-Kill
*[IFG]: Inhibitor-Field Generator
